---
type: about
title: "Memories of Peter 2"
parent: about
---

Memories of Peter (2)
=====================

_Peter’s eldest daughter, Philippa, shared the following memories of Peter’s
early career at the memorial on 6 Jan 2016:_

So there was Peter at King’s College, Cambridge. Dad, typically, said that he
felt he wasted his time there, worked ineffectually and took little part in
the many extra-curricular activities on offer. He didn’t get the hoped-for
first in his finals, but even so, the college gave him a bursary to study for
a PhD. Half way through this he walked into the Dean’s room. The Dean looked
up from the letter he was reading and asked, “Would you like a job on Punch?”

The background to that story was that when the youngest member of the
five-strong editorial staff of the satirical magazine Punch turned 40, they
decided that they were getting too old and needed to get some younger blood in
to keep them relevant. The editor wrote to a don he knew at Cambridge to ask
him to find someone to train up. Allegedly someone else also wrote to a don at
Oxford who never replied. So Peter was the only candidate. On his way to the
interview for the job he was knocked down by a tram and arrived covered with
blood and dirt, but they gave him the job anyway. It makes a great first job
story and eventually made its way into his novel, Death of a Unicorn.

Peter at Punch 1953-58

Around this time, Peter went to a party in a friend’s rooms at King’s College,
Cambridge and met my mother, Mary-Rose. A pretty girl, standing by the
fireplace laughing delightedly because she had just managed to break an
unbreakable glass in the grate. Family legend then goes that soon after they
met, she was whisked away to India (allegedly because my grandparents did not
approve) and he thought he’d lost her forever. Almost a year passed – and Dad
was at another party when she came up behind him and rapped him on the
shoulder with her fan – he turned around and there was the girl of his dreams.
They were married at Bramdean, Hampshire, on April 26th 1953.

Peter and Mary-Rose wedding 1953

Peter and Mary-Rose set up house in a flat in Pimlico, he continuing at Punch;
Mary-Rose working in the display department of Heal’s furniture store. A
couple of years later, I came along, followed by Polly the following year.

They then moved to a seedy area of West London called Holland Park and set
about converting a tall, thin terraced house into a single family home (in
common with all the other houses in that street, it had been let as single
rooms with coin-operated gas fires). The pub over the road was a favourite
haunt for local workers and Friday nights were frequently enlivened by fights
in the street. Occasionally accompanied by a drunken fiddler.

They did as much of the conversion of the house as they could themselves. Dad
made cupboards & shelves and created ingeniously designed tables and benches
to fit small spaces. Many of our childhood memories include laying slabs,
bricklaying, painting & decorating in every house we occupied.

Peter laying garden slabs with the girls

Meanwhile at Punch, Dad was progressing through a number of editorial
upheavals and jobs. At various points he was Art Editor (despite only being
able to draw trains sideways and dragons), resident poet, Literary Editor and
eventually Deputy Editor. It was clearly an extraordinary place to work
(occasionally the editorial team played cricket in the corridors) and brought
him into contact with some of the great humorists and cartoonists of the time.

At home, the family was growing, with the arrival of John and James. My
parents bought a couple of small ramshackle cottages on the outskirts of the
village of Crondall, Hampshire and set about converting them into a single
dwelling. With a well, a chalk heap, a growing vegetable garden and wonderful
views, this was a great weekend and holiday home – and also eventually became
the setting for The Devils’ Children.

Peter & children in the garden at Crondall

Some of the most abiding memories I have of my father from this time are the
stories. He would read to us every night without fail and every car journey
there would be a new episode of a story to listen to. As I think back, I
realise how extraordinary this was but at the time, we just took it as normal.
Sometimes they were retellings of great legends –with a twist, perhaps. More
often they would be completely new. The boys always wanted a battle, so there
were lots of those. It was a brilliant way to keep four lively kids quiet on
long car journeys. He was our in-car entertainment.

Peter reading to John and James at bedtime

Around this time Peter started tinkering with what he believed to be an
original idea for a crime novel, working on the kitchen table after supper.

In 1965 Peter and Mary-Rose moved from their cottage to take over half her
parent’s house at Bramdean, which must have been a huge stretch on a
journalist’s wages. It was a wonderful place in summer – though freezing cold
with a leaky roof in the winter. They developed a large vegetable garden and
Dad started brewing beer (more successful than his efforts at wine making!)

Peter on bicycle at Bramdean

By 1966-7ish Dad realised that the crime novel he was writing was completely
stuck. That must have been a bad time. But it also brought him the cold-sweat
nightmare which became the first scene of The Weathermonger. The following
evening, he put the crime novel aside and poured his heart into writing his
first children’s novel. Once that was done and on the way to his publisher, he
returned to the crime novel, saw pretty much instantly what he needed to do
with it and finished The Glass-Sided Ants Nest (published as Skin Deep in the
UK allegedly because someone at the publisher declared that no woman would
ever buy a book with an insect in the title).

1968 both The Weathermonger and The Glass-Sided Ant’s Nest were published to
great reviews. By that time he had completed two more novels and was starting
on a fifth. With these successes under his belt, he had what my maternal
grandfather described in his diary as ‘a sudden rush of blood to the head’,
left his job at Punch to become a full-time author – and also bought the other
half of the house at Bramdean.

My brother, James is now going to read the opening scene to _The
Weathermonger_ – the nightmare which started it all.
